## Introduction

Personality has always been a fascination of mine. While many
personality tests have little validity or predictive value, The Big Five
personality tests have a reputation of being a good measure with
predictive power. I have found a publicly available dataset of
demographic information and personality data that I wish to analyze
using techniques taught in class.

## What

As mentioned earlier, the Big Five Personality test is thought to be one
of the more accurate and predictive personality tests for human
behavior. For example, having a combination of high Agreeableness and
Conscientiousness usually means the person is going to be a good
employee while having high neuroticism is related to a variety of bad
outcomes. I would like to see if there are relationships between the
expression of different personality traits across countries and gender.

This dataset was not created by myself, and can be found at
[Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/lucasgreenwell/ocean-five-factor-personality-test-responses)

## Why

While we know that the expression of certain combinations of personality
traits predict certain behaviors, these traits are often seen as being
separate and distinct measures of personality. I argue that there are
likely ‘personality types’ - combinations of these traits that are more
likely to occur together - that define subsets of the population.

## How

My plan is to subset the dataset while controlling for the expression of
one or more personality traits. Using these traits as a control, I will
look to see if the other traits expression in this subset is
significantly different from the normal population.

## Body

Predicting human behavior has always been the goal of personality
research. Most personality tests started as observational interpretation
of behavior types and tried to create a logical framework for them, such
as the Meyers-Briggs test. Most of these tests turned out to have low
predictive power or real application, rendering them important in the
public eye and little else. The Big Five took a different approach. It
started with analyzing language into groups of related adjectives. When
a group of adjectives displayed distinct characteristics and a larger
population, they were deemed a ‘trait’. This eventually lead to five
personality traits- Openness to experience, Conscientiousness,
Extroversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. These traits turned out to
have higher predictive power than other personality tests.

## Cleaning Data

The dataset was quite large and had demographic information and the
actual responses to the individual questions. While this is ideal, it
means the dataset must be cleaned to be useful. For example, to account
for the tendency to give high ratings over low ratings regardless of the
question’s content, several of the questions are stated negatively. For
example, on a rating of 1-5, answering the question ‘I like to talk’
with a 5 would be high extroversion, but answering the question ‘I don’t
like loud parties’ with a 5 would actually be the opposite. I will write
a function to inverse a question’s rating and then manually code which
questions are positive or negative and apply the function only to
negative questions. Then, because there would be too many rows with this
dataset if looking only at the individual questions, I will average the
answers per trait to get a single score for the five traits.

## Controlling Trait Expression

Each observation (respondent) is represented in one row in the dataset.
This means that so long as the dataset is not pivoted or ‘melted’, it is
possible to subset the dataset looking for observations that have
certain traits or combinations of traits, and then see the effect on the
remaining traits. In order to visualize the data nicely in one graph,
the data will have to be pivoted after the subset operation.

## Grouping Data on Gender, Country, and Age

After trait expression has been modified, it will become possible to
group the data by a variety of other demographic information. The
demographic information I’m most interested in is Gender, Country, and
Age, as these three stand out to me as having significant impact on
people’s lives. Because this test has respondents from over 100
different countries, most with a low response rate, I plan on using data
from only countries with a high response rate. The others will be
aggregated into an ‘Other’ country group.

## Comparing Subset Populations

After, I plan to use statistical analysis to determine if the populations 
I'm looking at are significantly different. If they are, it will mean 
the findings are not caused by random chance.

## Considerations

There are many considerations to be aware of with this dataset. The
dataset represents an online self-reported personality test, which means
it does not represent a true random sampling of the population and the
responses are not an objective determination of how the participants
might really act. It’s possible that certain personality traits will be
more probable given that these personality traits might make responding
to a survey more likely. Also, while age is included in the data, it is
not a longitudinal study. This means that we cannot determine how
personality might change over time with this dataset. Also, the vast
majority of respondents are young (age 25 or younger), which could have
an influence on the results. This might be due to how old the test is,
or the fact that younger populations might be forced to take the test in
an introduction to psychology class. Lastly, when subsetting the
population will become much smaller than the general population, which
means the results could be skewed and the sample error could be quite
high.

## Topics From Class

1.  Git
2.  RMarkdown
3.  Statistical concepts such as normal distributions, mean, standard
    deviations, percentiles, and areas under the curve
4.  Regression lines
5.  Statistics to determine if two populations are significantly
    different (T tests).

## Conclusion

In conclusion, I expect this to be an interesting analysis of the data
in a way that could find macro personality types using the method
outlined above.
